Synchronizing phy clocks across different modems (#167)
subnero1/subnero1.github.io: _posts/2021-06-07-Synchronizing-physical-clocks-among-different-Subnero-modems.md

Although this frequency of the crystal quartz is reasonably stable, it is impossible to guarantee that all the crystals of different computers will operate at _exactly_ the same frequency. A crystal oscillator (XO) is an electronic circuit that uses the mechanical resonance of a vibrating piezoelectric crystal to create an electrical signal with the desired frequency. The resonant frequency depends on size, shape, elasticity, and the speed of sound in the material. Due to manufacturing tolerances, these properties are not identical across manufactured crystals, and so different crystals designed for the same nominal frequency produce slightly different frequency signals. Furthermore, as the operating temperature of the crystal changes, its material properties change, and so does its resonant frequency. These differences in frequency are tiny, but over long periods, the differences accumulate and cause the clocks to drift.

There are different oscillator types that exist to chose from including OCXOs, TCXOs, and XOs. The crystal controlled clock oscillator (XO) is a device that achieves its temperature stability from the quartz crystal's inherent temperature stability.

> A Temperature compensated crystal oscillator (TCXO) is a crystal oscillator with a temperature-sensitive reactance circuit in its oscillation loop to compensate the frequency-temperature characteristics inherent to the crystal unit. An OCXO is a crystal oscillator which is temperature controlled by a mini internal oven. This type of oscillator has a temperature controlling circuit to maintain a consistent temperature of the crystal and other key components. OCXOs are typically used when greater temperature stability is required. While this type of oscillator has a tenfold improvement over a TCXO for temperature vs. frequency stability, the OCXO tends to be higher in price and consumes more power.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A temperature compensated crystal oscillator (TCXO) is a crystal oscillator with a temperature-sensitive reactance circuit in its oscillation loop to compensate the frequency-temperature characteristics inherent to the crystal unit. An OCXO is a crystal oscillator which is temperature controlled by a mini internal oven. This type of oscillator has a temperature controlling circuit to maintain a consistent temperature of the crystal and other key components. OCXOs are typically used when greater temperature stability is required. While this type of oscillator has a tenfold improvement over a TCXO for temperature vs. frequency stability, the OCXO tends to be higher in price and consumes more power.
```

> For example, UnetStack-based Subnero modems can be optionally upgraded to use [low-drift clocks](https://subnero.com/products/sensors.html). Such clocks provide much better time stability and are suitable for such applications where time synchronization over long periods of time is critical.

> Now, when there is a possibility of clock drift, it is not easy for having multiple spatially separated modems with synchronized physical clocks. So the question arises, if the synchronization of physcial clocks across different UnetStakc enabled modems is needed, how do we synchronize them with each other?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, when there is a possibility of clock drift, it is not easy for having multiple spatially separated modems with synchronized physical clocks. So the question arises, if the synchronization of physical clocks across different UnetStack enabled modems is needed, how do we synchronize them with each other?
```

---
layout: post

> title: Synchronizing physical clocks among different Subnero modems

Reviewer 2: Do you really want to focus on Subnero modems only, rather than any UnetStack-based modem?

Reviewer 3: OK. Updated the title now.

Reviewer 2: You'd probably want to rename the file, and also ensure the main text is not too Subnero focused.

Reviewer 4: But this is Subnero blog not Unetstack blog right? So does it matter?

Reviewer 2: Ah, I didn't realize! Yes, if it's Subnero blog, that's perfectly fine. But which blog does this make most sense in?

Reviewer 3: Since we were using `phy.clockCalib` which is specific to Subnero modems, we went with the decision to put this blog in Subnero. However, this parameter is also in Unet audio so, this content might be suitable for all Unet SDOAMs. I can move this content if needed. Let me know any suggestions.

Reviewer 2: The `clockCalib` is specific to Yoda, not only to Subnero modems. But I don't have a strong preference one way or the other. Just having all technical blogs in one place makes it easier for readers to find.

banner : images/banner-pulse-synchronization.jpg
date:  2021-06-07
categories: wnc
thumbnail: images/pulse-thumbnail-modems.jpg
---

All Subnero modems have a “real-time clock” to keep track of time using a precise quartz crystal. Based on the defined frequency of this quartz, software running on the modem can precisely monitor the internal physical time given by parameter `phy.time` in Subnero modem.

> Although this frequency of the crystal quartz is reasonably stable, it is impossible to guarantee that all the crystals of different modems will operate at the same frequency. A crystal oscillator is an electronic circuit that uses the mechanical resonance of a vibrating piezoelectric crystal to create an electrical signal with the desired frequency. The resonant frequency depends on size, shape, elasticity, and the speed of sound in the material. Due to manufacturing tolerances, these properties are not identical across manufactured crystals, and so different crystals designed for the same nominal frequency produce slightly different frequency signals. Furthermore, as the operating temperature of the crystal changes, its material properties change, and so does its resonant frequency. These differences in frequency are tiny, but over long periods, the differences accumulate and cause the clocks to drift.

Reviewer 2: suggestion: "at _exactly_ the same frequency"

Reviewer 3: Fixed.

> 

Reviewer 2: You probably want to talk about the low-drift clock option here? Maybe even a few sentences on different types of clocks -- XO, TCXO, OCXO, atomic clocks, etc

Reviewer 3: Ok. Added the relevant details here.

Under this circumstance, it is not easy for having multiple spatially separated modems with synchronized physical clocks. If the synchronization of physcial clocks across different Subnero modems is needed, how do we synchronize them with each other?

There are two major problems to be addressed to synchronize clocks among different modems:

1. Modems start at different times so there may be a *clock offset* as shown in figure below:

![Clock offset between two modems]({{site.baseurl}}/images/clock-offset.png){: .center-image }

2. Modem clocks tick at different rates causing a *clock drift* as shown in figure below:

![Clock drift between two modems]({{site.baseurl}}/images/clock-drift.png){: .center-image }

# Compensating for clock offset in Subnero modems

> `Ranging` agent in UnetStack running on Subnero modem generates the clock offset information based on the message exchanges when range measurement is performed on the modem that initiates ranging. The clock offset between the two modems is populated in the ranging agent's parameter `ranging[host('B')].offset`. Where `host('B')` is the node address of modem B. More details on this can be found ![here](https://unetstack.net/handbook/unet-handbook_ranging_and_synchronization.html). 

Reviewer 2: The...

Reviewer 3: Fixed.

Once, the clock offset is known, it can be used to adjust the time locally to synchronize the physical time (`phy.time`). However, if a low-drift clock is not used, there is a possibility that the clocks tick at different rates, and clocks drift faster. Let us take a look at how we can compensate for the clock drift next.

> > NOTE: Subnero also provides ![low-drift clock](https://subnero.com/products/sensors.html) as an optional upgrade to the modem for users who require a low drift clock. These clocks provide much lower drift and are suitable for such applications where time synchronization is critical.

Reviewer 2: I think this should come earlier where I indicated previously.

Reviewer 3: Fixed.

# Compensating for clock drift in Subnero modems

> Since the modems might tick at different rates, one modem's clock may be faster than the other. An example is shown in the figure above where Modem A's clock is faster than Modem B, i.e., a slope of 1.2 on Modem A's clock. To compensate for this, the user of the modem can utilize a `phy.clockCalib` parameter. This parameter is a multiplier on the physical clock. So its default value is 1. If you set it to 1.2 the clock will run at 1.2x the rate of the actual hardware clock.

Reviewer 2: Might be nice to explain how to calibrate this with an example, if one has multiple modems.

Reviewer 3: I have tried and added step by step procedure on how one can do this.

---
layout: post
title: Synchronizing physical clocks among different Subnero modems
banner : images/banner-pulse-synchronization.jpg
date:  2021-06-07
categories: wnc
thumbnail: images/pulse-thumbnail-modems.jpg
---

> All Subnero modems have a “real-time clock” to keep track of time using a precise quartz crystal. Based on the defined frequency of this quartz, software running on the modem can precisely monitor the internal time. When the modem connects to the network (Internet), the software running on the modem then contacts a timer server, which is equipped with a UTC receiver or an accurate clock, to accurately reset the local timer using Network Time Protocol, also called NTP.

Reviewer: From this explanation, it looks like we use modem's RTC (which is the clock in the main SBC) to create `phy.time`. However, the internal time (Linux time) (updated using NTP when connected to a network with an NTP server, like the internet) is different from `phy.time` which is generated using the crystal connected to ADC. If you can address how both of these can be synchronized (by tracking offset between both), that would be great too.

Reviewer 3: I did not intend to talk about NTP actually. I have removed this. The explanation you are asking about would be the difference between `phy.rtc` and `phy.time`. Could you or @notthetup help add that small paragraph if needed or modify the existing one since I am not aware accurately of the internals of which clock is used where?

Reviewer 3: As part of addressing another comment, I have detailed measurements of `phy.rtc` and `phy.time` and how user can calibrate based on this. Please review and see if that addresses your point.

Reviewer: Looks good. Am wondering whether we should add the caveat that if the RTC is not synced to an NTP, the `phy.rtc.getTime()` will give wrong time. Either way, I am OK.

Although this frequency of the crystal quartz is reasonably stable, it is impossible to guarantee that all the crystals of different computers will operate at the same frequency. A crystal oscillator is an electronic circuit that uses the mechanical resonance of a vibrating piezoelectric crystal to create an electrical signal with the desired frequency. The resonant frequency depends on size, shape, elasticity, and the speed of sound in the material. Due to manufacturing tolerances, these properties are not identical across manufactured crystals, and so different crystals designed for the same nominal frequency produce slightly different frequency signals. Furthermore, as the operating temperature of the crystal changes, its material properties change, and so does its resonant frequency. These differences in frequency are tiny, but over long periods, the differences accumulate and cause the clocks to drift.

> Under this circumstance, it is not easy for having multiple spatially separated modems with synchronized physical clocks. If the usage of multiple internal physical clocks is desirable, how do we synchronize them with each other?

Reviewer: We have "usage of multiple internal physical clocks" because it is desirable, it is out of necessity?

Reviewer 3: It was a language issue. Take a look again. I have fixed it now.

There are two major problems to be addressed to synchronize clocks among different modems:

1. Modems start at different times so there may be a *clock offset* as shown in figure below:

![Clock offset between two modems]({{site.baseurl}}/images/clock-offset.png){: .center-image }

2. Modem clocks tick at different rates causing a *clock drift* as shown in figure below:

![Clock drift between two modems]({{site.baseurl}}/images/clock-drift.png){: .center-image }

# Compensating for clock offset in Subnero modems

`Ranging` agent in UnetStack running on Subnero modem generates the clock offset information based on the message exchanges when range measurement is performed on the modem that initiates ranging. The clock offset between the two modems is populated in the ranging agent's parameter `ranging[host('B')].offset`. Where `host('B')` is the node address of modem B. More details on this can be found ![here](https://unetstack.net/handbook/unet-handbook_ranging_and_synchronization.html). 

> Once, the clock offset is known, it can be used to adjust the time locally to synchronize the physical time (`phy.time`). However, if a high-performance clock (HPC) is not used, there is a possibility that the clocks tick at different rates, and clocks drift. Let us take a look at how we can compensate for the clock drift next.

Reviewer: Even for an HPC, the clocks will drift, just slowly.

Reviewer 3: Yup. Fixed in the explanation to better reflect that.

# Compensating for clock drift in Subnero modems

Since the modems might tick at different rates, one modem's clock may be faster than the other. An example is shown in the figure above where Modem A's clock is faster than Modem B, i.e., a slope of 1.2 on Modem A's clock. To compensate for this, the user of the modem can utilize a `phy.clockCalib` parameter. This parameter is a multiplier on the physical clock. So its default value is 1. If you set it to 1.2 the clock will run at 1.2x the rate of the actual hardware clock.

Therefore, to compensate Modem A's clock to run slower so that it matches Modem B's clock, we can set `phy.clockCalib = 1/1.2 = 0.83`.

The users of the modem should make measurements to figure out the nomimal values that they should set for `phy.clockCalib`. 

> > NOTE: Subnero also provides modems with High-Performance Clocks (HPC) for users who require an accurate and low drift clock. These clocks provide much lower drift and are suitable to such applications where time synchronization is critical.

Reviewer: This should not be at the end, but before the "Compensating for clock drift in Subnero modems" section. The clocks are called a low drift clock, not HPC and provide appropriate links: https://subnero.com/products/sensors.html

Additionally, low drift clocks are optional upgrades, we do not have different modems with different clocks.

Reviewer 3: Fixed this.

There are different oscillator types that exist to chose from including OCXOs, TCXOs, and XOs. The crystal controlled clock oscillator (XO) is a device that achieves its temperature stability from the quartz crystal's inherent temperature stability.
A Temperature compensated crystal oscillator (TCXO) is a crystal oscillator with a temperature-sensitive reactance circuit in its oscillation loop to compensate the frequency-temperature characteristics inherent to the crystal unit. An OCXO is a crystal oscillator which is temperature controlled by a mini internal oven. This type of oscillator has a temperature controlling circuit to maintain a consistent temperature of the crystal and other key components. OCXOs are typically used when greater temperature stability is required. While this type of oscillator has a tenfold improvement over a TCXO for temperature vs. frequency stability, the OCXO tends to be higher in price and consumes more power.

> > NOTE: Subnero provides ![low-drift clock](https://subnero.com/products/sensors.html) as an optional upgrade to the modem for users who require a low drift clock. This clock provides much lower drift and are suitable for such applications where time synchronization is critical. 

Reviewer 2: Suggested wording:
> For example, UnetStack-based Subnero modems can be optionally upgraded to use [low-drift clocks](https://subnero.com/products/sensors.html). Such clocks provide much better time stability and are suitable for such applications where time synchronization over long periods of time is critical.

Reviewer 3: Thanks, prof. I updated the description now.

# Compensating for clock drift

Since the modems might tick at different rates, one modem's clock may be faster than the other. An example is shown in the figure above where Modem A's clock is faster than Modem B, i.e., a slope of 1.2 on Modem A's clock. To compensate for this, the user of the modem can utilize a `phy.clockCalib` parameter. This parameter is a multiplier on the physical clock. So its default value is 1. If you set it to 1.2 the clock will run at 1.2x the rate of the actual hardware clock.

Therefore, to compensate Modem A's clock to run slower so that it matches Modem B's clock, we can set `phy.clockCalib = 1/1.2 = 0.83`.

The users of the modem should make measurements to figure out the nomimal values that they should set for `phy.clockCalib`. 

# An example of calibrating clock

We will consider two modems A and B for this example. To synchronize modem A's clock with the modem B's clock the following procedure may be followed:

1.  Make a measurement of system time and physical clock time on modem A.

To measure system time, open modem's web shell and type the following:

```groovy
> phy.rtc.getTime()

```

> To measured physical clock time, open modem's web shell and type the following:

Reviewer 2: "measure"

Reviewer 3: Fixed.

```groovy
> phy.time

```

> `phy.rtc.getTime()` returns the number of milliseconds since January 1, 1970, 00:00:00 GMT represented by this `Date` object (`phy.rtc`). The `phy.time` returns time in microseconds. Make a record of both these measurements in the same unit.

Reviewer 2: How? Perhaps we should show a simple script that someone can run, and then just get the clock calibration number?

Reviewer 3: I tried to add a code snippet to show a way to do this now. Please check if you think that makes sense.

Reviewer 2: I still don't see how someone can follow it step-by-step. By the time they do one step and the next, time has elapsed. You need a single script that does this.

Reviewer 2: New conversation on this below.

Reviewer 3: I have provided a script below to run on say modem A and modem B to figure out the slope based on which calibration factor to set in `phy.clockCalib` can be computed.

Reviewer 2: OK
